[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Session three is very lengthy, as you can see from the number of slides, and it covers two chapters in your text.

Chapter seven dealing with space environment and chapter eight dealing with satellite relative motion.

Now, you may think this is a lot of material,

and in fact is because we are still building our toolbox and we have to have these concepts

well in grain before we can actually do a decent job of designing a space mission.

So chapter seven and eight covered in session three.

And here's the rub. I will have two homework assignments, one for each chapter, one for seven and one for eight.

I strongly suggest that you read the material through the beginning of the section on chapter eight.

Stop at that point and work on homework number two.

Then once you have that done, continue on with the remaining part of the material on the slide presentations and completing that.

Then tackle the homework. Number three.

Now in order to do number three, which is a homework number three, which is uh,

based on chapter eight, you will need what's called the live calc table 812 on page 186.

If you look at the inside cover of your textbook, you will see how to access the website for the publisher and log on to these live calc tables.

However, however very important, a lot of those well, let's say some of those live calc,

uh, Excel spreadsheets and tables and figures on the website don't function.

And I contacted the publisher and they said they were working on it.

However, they are not fixed yet, but they did share with me the correct operating correctly operating figures and tables and live calc format.

So I will beginning with this session and chapter eight.

I will include the Live Calc Excel spreadsheet that you will need to complete the homework assignment for,

and that is based on table eight, dash 11 and your textbook.

So that's what it will will be later listed on your tab for the session three Live Calc table 811.

And from now on, as we go through the text and I find places where you will need to use the live calc calculations for your work.

I will include those tables and figures as part of the session material,

so that you do not have to go to the website and then find that a particular live calc, um, figure or table doesn't work.

So that's what it's all about. Two homework sessions this time.

Please split the session up into chapter seven.

Do that homework, turn it in, and then finish the material for chapter eight.

All this is so that we can press on the chapter nine,

which in itself is going to lay the foundations for selecting orbits for our space mission analysis and design.

So that's why we're going that's why this is a fairly lengthy session.

And there are two homework assignments I will grant you about a week and a half, maybe a little less.

The idea is get the homework assignments turned in as soon as possible so that as you start with session for chapter nine,

you won't be having to play catch up with the homework or then the work for chapter nine.

So that's where we're going recently.

Um, in fact, on the 18th of January, that was only a couple weeks ago.

Now, I guess one week ago, the sun released a coronal mass ejection that was extremely strong, that particular CME.

Impacted the Earth as an x 1.9 flare from the sun.

And that, in fact created aurora that we're seeing as far south as Alabama.

And that's very unusual. So even though we're supposedly on the downslope of solar activity, that hasn't really occurred since only a week ago,

on the 18th of January and 2026, there has been a very, very large solar event that created a big disruption to the Earth's geomagnetic field.

So this is something that in your text you can read more about it.

But this is an event that recently happened and there's no real telling when the next one will occur.

The website that you see here on this slide is a good place to go to see what the mean.

Daily flux of solar activity was in terms of solar flux units.

And you see what that the term means there on the notes to the side of the the slide.

But the idea here is that as you are designing your space mission,

you have to take a look at what the predicted solar activity is going to be for not only the time of launch,

but of course, the entire lifetime of your space mission,

so that you can adequately prepare the mission in terms of shielding and perhaps redundancy for dealing

with the excess solar radiation that occurs during maximum cycles or maximum periods of solar activity.

So take a look at this. Go to the website and check out the most current information just to see what it's looking like.

Here's an interesting graphic of a solar coronal mass ejection effect.

If you look at this and there's also a YouTube link there that you can look at.

That's a pretty good, um, video of real CME effects from eruptions from the sun.

But the whole situation here is that when a CME occurs, if it is directed toward the Earth,

and there's certainly a lot of coronal mass ejection events that occur when the sun,

when those events are not directed toward the Earth, because they can occur anywhere on the sun's surface.

But in this particular case, if the solar the CME is directed towards the Earth,

it reaches the Earth in the form of a shockwave of traveling mass of solar energetic particles.

And that causes a geomagnetic storm that may in fact disrupt the Earth's magnetosphere,

compressing it as shown on this slide on the dayside and extending and dragging it essentially on the nightside toward,

uh, the different the distance away from the sun.

When this magnetosphere reconnects on the night side, remember magnetic lines of flux, uh,

always reconnect when and when the magnetosphere does reconnect on the nightside of the Earth, it releases power on the order of terawatts.

And that power can be directed back toward the Earth's upper atmosphere.

That process causes particularly strong aurora in the in large regions around the Earth's magnetic poles.

And of course, aurora we know as northern lights. But the CMEs, along with solar flares,

can disrupt radio transmissions and cause severe damage to satellites as well as terrestrial electrical transmission lines.

The reason for that is, as you know, if you take, um, a long line of conducting material such as power lines,

and you pass that line of conducting metal through a changing magnetic field, electricity is generated in the electrical wires.

And that's the way, of course, an alternator or generator works.

But in this particular case, we have fixed power lines fixed to the ground.

But the magnetic field fluctuates wildly and strongly.

And that's the same type of effect. And so it induces additional voltage in the power lines.

And what happened back in the 80s was that a severe CME effect caused such a fluctuation in the Earth's

magnetic field that it induced overload voltages in the power distribution lines in the northeastern section,

um, provinces of Canada. The extreme overvoltage tripped circuit breakers and power substations,

and essentially shut down the entire northeastern part of Canada from the power grid, simply due to the CME effects on the Earth's magnetic field.

So humans in space, of course, at high altitudes, in air or in airplanes,

risk exposure to the intense CME radiation that is, and DIC induced into the Earth's atmosphere.

This is one reason why, uh, airline crews that fly over the North Pole frequently may, in fact,

end up with a higher total lifetime radiation dosage than the rest of us who don't do such travel.

So keep in mind the effects of CMEs when you design your your space mission.

Definitely something that we need to consider for shielding communications issues,

uh, electrical power sources as well as, uh, onboard processing redundancy.

This graphic shows some of the details of the Earth's magnetosphere.

You can see the bow shock, which is of course, toward the sun,

and shows you how the magnetosphere of the Earth causes the solar particles to stream around the Earth.

Not only do they impact the Earth on the sun side,

but the layer of high energy particles as much closer to the Earth on the sun side than it is on the dark side.

The Van Allen radiation belts that surround the Earth are a function of the Earth's magnetic field,

trapping and deflecting the high energy particles from the sun that we talked about on the previous slide.

You'll notice that there are, in fact, on this drawing two radiation belts.

In fact, most recently, a third radiation belt has been detected.

It is believed. But the point here is that notice, because of the misalignment of the Earth's magnetic poles with the rotation axis of the Earth,

that the radiation belts actually come closer to the Earth in the Southern hemisphere than they do in the Northern hemisphere.

So as you plan your right, your space mission, you're going to have to determine whether the altitude required by your mission

will place your satellite in one or the other of these radiation belts.

It might be good if you can design and such to put your satellite either below the inner radiation belt or between the two of them.

If, however, that's not going to be feasible,

then you're going to have to shield your satellite sensors and onboard processing and communication system from this radiation.

Now, from a human standpoint,

the space the Apollo astronauts as they traveled to the moon pass through the radiation belts, of course, but fortunately,

their exposure was minimized by following a trajectory that went along the edge of the belts that avoided the strongest areas of radiation.

So that space mission actually had to change the trajectory of the flight to avoid the heaviest areas of radiation.

The. Because of that, the total radiation exposure to the astronauts was estimated to be much less than the five rem,

which stands for radiation equivalent man. The set by the Atomic Energy Commission for people who work with radioactivity.

Bottom line notice where the radiation belts are.

They strengthen and weaken because of the solar activity.

Plan your space mission appropriately, either with shielding or placing your orbit where it's not impacted by the radiation belts.

Because of the the non-alignment of the Earth's rotational axis and the magnetic polar axis.

As we showed on that previous slide, the radiation belts actually are closer to the Earth's surface in the southern Hemisphere.

And you'll notice in this graphic that the inner Van Allen radiation belt actually comes very low in the South Atlantic area of the world.

And this is what gives rise to the so-called South Atlantic Anomaly, where low Earth orbiting spacecraft experienced very high radiation levels.

Now, to accommodate that, many times, satellites that are.

Predicted to fly through the South Atlantic Anomaly.

The owner operators will turn off sensors that are extremely sensitive to radiation effects.

As the satellites pass through that area and or the satellite operators will, once the satellite emerges from the radiation belt,

the owner operators may in fact reboot the onboard processing because of a potential for having induced single event

upsets or latch ups caused by the extreme radiation effects on the integrated circuitry of the onboard processors.

So another thing to consider if your satellites are going to be in and latitudes such that it passes through the South Atlantic Anomaly,

you better take care to either shield that properly or have some mitigating procedures

to overcome any potential upsets or latch ups or degradation in your space mission.

I mentioned the so-called South Atlantic Anomaly before, and here's a graphical picture of it as a, um.

Uh, chart of the total electron counts that occur over this particular part of the South Atlantic.

And you'll notice some of the reasoning behind it. The Van Allen belt actually dips toward that South Atlantic area.

And so satellites that are flying in fairly low Earth orbit in that,

that pass through that area are subject to potential effects because of the radiation.

Since we're dealing in this chapter with the solar environment or space environment.

Here are some of the health hazards that are associated with those radiation belts that we've seen in the preceding slides.

Not only that, but we have some other radiation hazards due to the galactic cosmic radiation.

Radiation from those trapped particles in the magnetic field of the Earth, and also periodic or direct radiation from the solar flares themselves.

They may impact manned space vehicles or unmanned space vehicles, regardless of what's on the space vehicle.

One has to take the health hazards or the electronic hazards into account from these three main components of ionizing radiation.

You might think that the GCR effects would be strongest during, um, periods of active solar,

um, flares, etc. but actually it's not the case during a very active sun cycle.

The magnetosphere of the Earth is energized, so to speak, by the constant bombardment of high energy particles from the sun.

So during a minimum of the solar cycle, the magnetosphere is actually the least strong and therefore does not deflect the galactic

cosmic radiation as much as it would when it's energized during high periods of solar activity.

This chart is a little bit outside the scope of our normal space mission analysis, but it's a cross-section of a typical semiconductor device.

And in this particular case, if you look at the left side of the chart,

you'll see the impact from a fast charge particle from a galactic cosmic ray, for example.

And what happens when that particle impacts this type of material?

It creates ionization or free electrons within the material.

Those free electrons then pass through the remaining circuitry in the form of a signal.

And of course, it's a bogus signal compared to what the sensor the device was supposed to be doing.

But nevertheless, it is an electrical signal. And therefore in space mission analysis design,

you're going to need to protect this device if there is the potential for having impacts from not only GCR effects,

but all sources of ionizing radiation.

Because remember, ions are free electrons and free nuclear particles, and the free electrons are what causes signals in our semiconductor devices.

Well to continue. Um, a lot of satellites are designed so that the charge that builds up on it can bleed off.

For example, there will be insulating sections to satellite structures so that a charge, uh, cannot build up over the whole vehicle.

Also, uh, number of satellites that are subject to static charge build up will have electron guns

mounted on the satellite that actually bleed off and that squirts the electrons off that,

um, off the satellite to build up this charge.

So, uh, engineers have to go through a fair amount of pain and agony to design a satellite to, uh, deal with a static charge build up.

Single event upsets. Are manifested in the form of bit flips, as you know.

Of course, digital circuitry is um. Zeros and ones.

That's the way it works. And a single event upset caused by ionizing radiation can in fact cause what's named bit flip.

So it can change the state of a bit in memory or in the processor.

And this effect can certainly damage stored data so that it might not be, uh, usable anymore.

It can cause uploaded software to be corrupted and therefore not work.

So you'll have to somehow design into your system the ability to either have a redundant copy of your operating software,

or put in such things as forward error correction, where you can in fact detect and correct some single event bit flips.

These are different ways of mitigating it.

You can, uh, single event ups that can actually halt processors if it affects the software in a specific way.

So the cause for this is direct ionization of the silicon, as I showed on one of those previous slides,

by a high energy ionizing radiation that passes through the material.

Satellites that are generally less than fourth or Earth radii are really also affected by the radiation belts.

So your space mission has to take into account the potential of single event upsets, and you must design into your system a way to mitigate that.

If you notice that you have a totally corrupted, um, piece of operating software, your system should be designed so that you can,

from the ground, upload a pure version and have the system go back to its nominal operating state.

This is particularly important if you're doing the inter solar missions, where you may be sending a spacecraft to Mars or one of the other planets.

If that spacecraft software becomes corrupted due to single event upsets, you could have a big issue.

And so you need to design your missions so that you can provide some types of mitigating circumstances or procedures to avoid this type of issue.

So how does a spacecraft engineer mitigate the effects of single event upsets?

Well, one choice is by using radiation hardened, um, components.

Unfortunately, those are expensive. Um, considerably more expensive than normal, uh, hardware.

Um, they could also use older technology. A large feature size and solid state memory tends to mitigate the use.

And, uh, unfortunately, if you do that, if you use older technology, your mission performance requirements may suffer.

So there's kind of a trade off there. You can also use redundancy and memory.

In fact, triple redundancy is one of the frequently used methods to mitigate.

But unfortunately the trade off there is weight and additional power requirements.

Headache, memory, error detection and correction.

Memory and processors are another way of, uh, mitigating this.

In fact, what you do is run these error detection algorithms at frequent intervals to detect any lurking single event upsets that have occurred.

Also, uh, typically when a satellite passes through the South Atlantic Anomaly,

it is programmed to reset or reboot the processor just to, uh, take into account any possible skew effects caused by that anomaly.

This drawing is quite famous, and I'm sure you've most likely seen one like it before, but this is a graphic depicting Leo tracked space objects.

On this particular drawing, there are approximately 15,000 objects, 95% of which are labeled as debris by the NASA tracking system.

So the idea here is, yes, it really looks crowded.

Other folks will say, well, space is a big place and you don't really need to worry about it.

However, there have been several instances of satellites that have had collisions with other space objects, debris, or other active satellites.

So the issue here is if you are going to put your satellite into low-Earth orbit,

firstly, you must be aware that there are other satellites in that environment.

Secondly, you must be comply.

You must comply with the most recent international agreements, which say that after your satellite has achieved its mission end,

you must have developed some type of mechanism by which your Leo satellite will be orbited.

And that takes the form of a number of different ways.

You can either have sufficient propellant onboard to.

Do you orbit the satellite or you must have some other mechanism.

And one popular way now is to deploy some type of a solar sail, which will, for low-Earth orbit and satellites,

cause enough drag thanks to the thin but present atmosphere at low-Earth orbit.

The drag will eventually cause the orbit to decay into the atmosphere, and the satellite will burn up.

The requirements are that your satellite must be de-orbit it after 25 years, 25 years after it has been declared mission ended.

So something else to include in your space.

Mission analysis and design is a way to get rid of your satellite.

Even today, we note that the Chinese space station is which is no longer inhabited, is going to return to Earth sometime in the first half of 2018.

It's a very big and very non symmetrical object.

So the atmospheric drag that is associated with that satellite is unpredictable.

And therefore the time and place when that space station actually orbits and impacts the Earth parts of it will anyway is unknown.

This has happened many many times in the past. The Soviet Mir space station, the U.S. space, Earth's correction, Skylab mission from the 80s.

These are just representative samples of some of the bigger space objects that

have been orbited through natural occurrences in an unpredictable fashion.

So be aware. When you design your space mission,

you must comply with these international requirements and contain in your design some type of material

or processor or mechanism that will allow your satellite to deorbit within that specified time frame.

Stepping out from the earth a little bit to the geosynchronous belt.

You can see here a concentration in that ring around the Earth of the geostationary tracked objects.

There is also a fair amount of, um, dots in this, in this chart representing the higher latitude objects, which are primarily due to Russian objects.

Since Russia has a great deal of its landmass in the northern latitudes.

They have a lot of communication satellites that have a pretty high inclination to their orbit,

and that's what is responsible for a lot of the dots that you see out of the plane of the geostationary belt in this graphic.

The last graphic was kind of an equatorial plane in plain view of the geosynchronous belt.

If you look at this graphic, we're looking also at the Geo belt but from above.

So in this polar view you see a clearly see how the geostationary belt satellites form a nice ring around the Earth.

But you also see a lot of other things going on.

Now a lot of this material that's in space gets degraded due to the something called atomic oxygen, which we'll hear about is very corrosive.

And solar heating and solar radiation has also resulted in the production of a lot of particulates,

such as paint flakes and bits of multilayer insulation from spacecraft,

etc. solid rocket motors that are used to boost satellite orbits have produced a lot of debris items,

too, including motor casings, aluminum oxide exhaust particles, slag from the nozzles itself, motor liner,

residual solid fuel fragments, and exhaust cone bits that result from erosion during the burn.

A major contributor to orbital debris background has been object breakup.

More than 100 and some odd breakups have been verified, and most are believed to have occurred due to explosions.

Batteries when they freeze tend to explode collisions with other space objects, but the majority seem to have occurred from explosions,

either fuel tanks that are ruptured, batteries that have ruptured, etc. explosions can occur when the propellant and oxidizer inadvertently mix.

Residual propellant becomes over pressurized due to solar heating, and therefore brass breaks the pressurization container or vessel.

Batteries become over pressurized and explode, and some satellites have been deliberately detonated for one reason or another.

Explosions can also be indirectly triggered by collisions with other debris.

Three collisions are known to have occurred since the beginning of the Space Age, and that's between active objects or objects and other debris.

In addition, there is a debris research community that has concluded that at least one additional breakup was caused by a collision.

That group has estimates that the cause of approximately 22% of observed break ups is unknown.

At this point,

approximately 70,000 objects estimated to be at least two centimeters in size have been observed between 850 and 1000km and their altitude,

and NASA has hypothesized that these objects are frozen bits of nuclear react and cooling that are leaking from a number of

Russian radar satellites that use radar radio thermo generators as their power source at altitudes higher or lower than 2000km,

is generally believed that most of the debris population dominates the natural

meteoroid population that has objects at least a millimeter in size and larger,

so there's a lot of stuff up there that you're going to have to keep in mind as you design, build, and fly your space mission.

So here you can see a graph representing the catalogued low earth objects.

And the amount of debris. Notice how much debris in the form of rocket bodies and other things are compared to true payloads.

Again, this is low Earth orbit. This table in your text shows the top ten as of May 2010.

Historical breakups of space vehicles you notice right at the top is the Chinese weather satellite Yung one C,

which was deliberately shot down by the Chinese and a demonstration of their anti-satellite capabilities.

It is created, as you can see, a tremendous amount of debris, most of which has been cataloged,

but some of which, obviously because of the small size, has escaped tracking.

From there you can see some accidental collisions.

Some explosions not shown on this table was the deliberate exploding of an American satellite by an American Asat capability.

Although that particular satellite didn't create a lot of debris, nevertheless,

there still is some of it up there, and it's supposed to be orbiting fairly soon.

But nevertheless, as soon as you do anything in space, you're going to be causing some kind of debris.

Okay, onward and upward to chapter eight. Now things start to get pretty interesting from a geometry standpoint, from a mathematical standpoint,

and you're going to have to put on your thinking cap on when you read through the section of the book on the celestial

sphere and the way a coordinate system based on a celestial sphere works to help us design our space mission.

So, as I said earlier, settle back. This chapter eight is pretty detailed and needs to be read carefully.

This drawing goes along with the drawings in figure eight seven on page 154.

It's describing graphically the position of the sun with respect to a spacecraft.

And the idea here is that we have to be concerned about that in order to make sure

that our solar arrays are oriented properly according to the position of the sun,

so that we get the maximum electrical power generated.

It goes along with the discussion on the eclipse issues for low Earth orbiting satellites.

That's described in chapter 8.1.1.

It's a little difficult to grasp, but take a close look at it,

because your mission analysis definitely requires the ability to determine how much electrical power your satellite can derive from the sun,

particularly in low-Earth orbit satellites. You're going to run into the issue of eclipse,

and that means you're going to have to size your onboard electrical power system to be able to handle the eclipse time.

By using batteries, you'll have to store energy, and that means you're going to have to when you come out of the eclipse,

orient the solar arrays properly to recharge the batteries, as well as provide power to the payload.

Obviously, in a low Earth orbiting satellite, the motion of the solar arrays is going to be virtually continuous as it circles the Earth.

Particularly for satellites that are whose mission involves looking at the ground so that the satellite is oriented toward the ground,

either for communications or for imaging, for example.

But the solar arrays have to be oriented to the sun.

So this drawing, as I say, is commensurate with the figure eight seven.

And it also describes, of course, the different angles involved in making sure that the solar arrays are always pointed at the sun.

One of the first things we have to do when we start looking at the the, um, information here in chapter eight is to decide on our coordinate systems.

We talked about that briefly a little earlier, but here,

for example from the book figure eight eight are some of the coordinate systems that we need to deal with.

So be sure you understand which ones are which and how they work.

The first one of course, is based on the spacecraft itself.

And that's where you as an engineer come into play. You know what the payload of your spacecraft is.

And if it's, for example, an imager that has to look at the ground, you can define what your coordinate axis is.

In plot B, you can see the typical Earth fixed coordinate system.

Now the interesting thing is you see the Greenwich meridian.

That's longitude zero.

And the x axis is traditionally identified as passing from the center of the Earth through the equator, where the longitude zero is.

Then y and z are orthogonal to that axis.

In C, you can realize how a spacecraft in orbit around the Earth will move,

you can roll, it can pitch, and it can your and those terms are identified in your text.

And be sure you understand.

When I talk about a roll axis or a pitch axis, what we really mean with regard to the satellite in its orbit around the Earth.

And then finally in picture D, we see another coordinate system which is the celestial coordinate system.

In this case, the x axis goes from the center of the Earth through the equator in the direction of the vernal equinox.

So in the constellations of star, you will see this chart, uh, next week when we talk in much more detail about orbits.

But I wanted you to at least get familiar with the graphic that describes the road, the motion of a satellite around a central attracting body.

And here you can see the references to the vernal equinox.

That's the little V shaped object.

On the right hand side, you can see the definition of the argument of periapsis, true anomaly, and some of the other.

The terms that we will be discussing in much more detail next week.

But they all originate at a common origin.

And that's why it's important to understand about coordinate systems.

Chapter 8.2 in your text is fairly long and fairly detailed, but it begins to point out the issues in dealing with spherical geometry.

In this particular case, the text uses the example of a sun sensor.

The sun sensor is a planar array of photosensitive elements, and it's looking at the celestial sphere, which by its very name is very cool.

So in the discussion in the text, it points out that one can easily determine the field of view, as shown in figure 815 on page 163,

simply by using geometry, and you can calculate the area of the sensor as it would see the sky.

But as it shows and take your 816. This is a very straightforward solution.

But it is wrong because we are dealing with spherical geometry.

The remainder of section 8.2 goes into some more detail, geometrically speaking, about the spherical issues in dealing with sensors.

Looking at the sky, the celestial sphere, and the other way around, we're going to be looking at the ground.

Perhaps for some space missions. And the Earth or other planets are not flat and they're not planar.

They're round. So if we have a planar sensor that's trying to image and a space object, even though it may not be perfectly spherical, we will do.

We will definitely have to deal with physical issues dealing with spherical geometry.

So read through section 8.2. It gets very convoluted, but read through to make sure that you understand because one.

By the time we get to section 8.3 where the title is looking at the earth from space,

then you will see why it's important to understand about spherical geometry,

and particularly in subsection 8.3.1, when we have to transform between the Earth and spacecraft coordinates.

So in this particular subchapter,

we begin to discuss the issue of looking at a spherical Earth from a planar sensor and what type of view you're going to have.

What type of projected area on to the the sensor array.

And so all the way through section 8.4, you'll see very specific and simple math.

But the concepts may be difficult to grasp initially.

But if you're trying to project or trying to image the earth or even send a radio signal to the Earth,

it's necessary to take into account the spherical nature of the Earth.

And so far as the the position and orientation of the satellite.

So section of chapter eight is definitely not the most straightforward concept.

The math is simple, and certainly if you look at, for example, table eight, dash 11,

page 184, you will see a summary of computations that we may need to determine.

Ground station passes from the observing standpoint of a Leo satellite.

If we have to image the Earth, acquire data, transmit the data to the ground,

we have to know where the ground station is and when will be in view of it.

If we are trying to observe a particular area on the earth,

we need to know when that area is going to be available and how long it'll be available for imaging from the satellite.

And you'll notice that table eight, dash 11 is one of these Excel spreadsheets, which is a live calculation type of system.

If you remember, we discussed the fact that you can log on to the microcosm website.

Go to this particular table and then adjust the parameters for the particular mission that you have in mind.

And so you may want to dog here this page,

because sooner or later you will end up having to calculate the position of a ground station, the area of imaging from a satellite.

And that's a big, very big hint. Your book goes into a fair amount of detail about the celestial sphere.

It can be a little confusing, so I've included this additional chart just to perhaps help you in eye and understanding how this celestial

sphere relates to mapping of a satellite imaging system onto the ground or satellite path onto the Earth.

So now that you've at least been exposed to the fact that we have to deal with spherical geometry,

let's start looking at the Earth as viewed from space with spherical geometry in mind.

In this situation, we need to be able to determine the relative geometry of objects on the Earth as viewed from the satellite.

For example, where is the target? How do we identify the target coordinates on Earth?

Well, that's fairly simple. Latitude and longitude. Right? But how do we relate that to our satellite position vector.

And what is the relative geometry. The next few slides will discuss this concept.

In this graphic you can see how FAA satellite is looking straight down or what we say as we say that

this sub satellite point is that neighbor directly below the satellite as it passes over the Earth.

The object that we will see on the ground will look like a round circle.

But as you can imagine, if we start looking off to the side of our pass,

you'll notice that the illuminated or the imaged section of the Earth is no longer round, even on a spherical Earth, but it's an ellipsoid shape.

And that's when things start to get really interesting from a geometry standpoint.

So on this slide, the things to remember are we're looking at nadir, which is straight down.

Our field of view of the satellite is represented by the dotted lines,

the dashed lines representing the extreme edge of the field of view of the satellite.

And we have the other imaging satellite, which is now shown to be looking offset from its nominal path.

Figure 826 in your book is a little bit different than what I have on this slide, but there are some angles here that you need to be aware of.

The first one is, as the book points out, angle row, which is the angular radius of the Earth.

From the spacecraft angle, Lambda sub zero is measured from the Earth center to the intercepting point on the surface of the Earth,

from the spacecraft's viewpoint, hidden very small small.

On this drawing in your book, there's another angle Epsilon.

Epsilon is what is known as the grazing angle or the spacecraft elevation angle, measured at the target between the spacecraft and the local horizon.

So you're standing here on the Earth, and you see the spacecraft at a certain elevation above the horizon, and that's angle epsilon.

Now, epsilon depends upon the height of the satellite, and that's about it.

So the imaging system is where angle rho comes into play.

If you look at the equations over on page 173 and drawing figure 828.

Be careful that you don't get confused about all these various angles.

Here we're using the law of cosines and the law of sines to determine some very important aspects of our mission.

And those angles and distances are related to each other through the spherical geometry and the law of cosines.

Look carefully at those equations to make sure that you understand.

For example, on figure 828. Where angle epsilon is.

We just mentioned that the grazing angle angle lambda is the angle between the observer,

the target point, and the earth center compared to the satellite sub satellite point angle.

Theta is the nadir angle as viewed from the spacecraft to the ground.

All of these angles become important when you're trying to determine distances involved and angles of observation.

Okay, now we're going to get down to some nitty gritty math.

Take a look on page 174 at that table 8-8 that shows you the mathematics involved in determining the access

area for a satellite that has a certain sub satellite point and a target that's at a different place.

So take a look at this. Read section 8.3.1 and you'll see the terminologies.

And through the table 8-8. Become very familiar with how you would calculate those areas.

And this is a transformation between latitude longitude access area coordinates and the spacecraft nadir coordinates.

It's a very important table. You should probably copy it and nail it on your wall because you will see it again.

This is a different way of looking at, uh, similar, um, characteristics from the previous slide.

But here we have a satellite that has a certain height h above the Earth.

There is a target located not directly below the satellite.

And in fact the target is located at a latitude difference lambda from the sub satellite point.

If you are at the target, you would have a look angle to the satellite of Epsilon.

And as you can see, the higher the satellite goes, the greater that angle epsilon would be here in this drawing,

the satellite has an imaging system that has a certain field of view, that angular field of view, that half angle on this drawing as rho.

And so what we want to know is can this satellite image the target, given that we know where the target is from the latitude on the Earth,

we know what the height of the satellite is and what m where its sub satellite point is.

So if you look at this geometry, you should be able to determine that.

Yes. Given some of these other parameters such as field of view rho, we can determine whether we will be able to see a target or not.

And for completeness sake, here is a different view showing the total cap lambda field of view of the satellite

and some of the other parameters such as where the horizon is on the satellite.

How far can it see around the earth? So now you can see that it's beginning to get a little more complicated when we're trying to deal with the

real world of observation or communications capabilities from a satellite in orbit around a spherical object.

Look carefully here on page 174, the different transformations between latitude,

longitude, area, access coordinates and the spacecraft nadir coordinates.

Figure 829 shows, for example, the relationship between a target and a sub satellite point on the Earth's surface.

If you read through all these angles and equations, you'll see that some of them are fairly straightforward.

Others are not particularly straightforward since you may be primarily used to dealing with planar geometry.

So read through this. Be able to understand, because, as I'm pointed out on the previous slide, you will need to know this.

If you are trying to plan a space mission which has to have certain areas of coverage on a spherical Earth,

and know when and where those areas of coverage occur.

Again, this is a more satellite view from an observer standpoint.

And you can see from the geometry on this slide the ability that you have to determine field of view.

Look at angle from the target to the satellite. The distance through which the satellite and the ground site are actually in view.

And that's important if you are a communications person and you are trying to download data from the satellite,

you want to be able to determine how long will that satellite be in view, even if it's not passing directly overhead?

You want to be able to figure that out. This chart kind of goes along with the discussion on page 177, uh,

eight and nine in your textbook showing what the view from 1000km is from a spacecraft above the Earth,

and how the portion of the Earth that can be seen varies from whether you are looking at the Earth projection on the left side of this chart,

or the celestial sphere projection spacecraft centered on the right that represents the same view.

Just be sure you understand why they look different.

Here is a simple chart showing a satellite with a field of view as it's going around the earth and its ground track.

Now, the interesting point here is you will notice that as the Earth turns underneath the satellite,

there will be some overlap between different passes of the satellite.

And that's probably a good thing because as you can see from this chart,

the field of view of the satellite is larger than the difference between subsequent orbits.

So you're guaranteed coverage of the Earth, even though the Earth is turning underneath the satellite.

This drawing is from a previous version of smash, and it shows the ground path for satellites that have different differences in the

change of longitude for successive crossings of the equator on the ascending path.

For example, the path shown in figure A or letter A on this chart had the satellite there.

The difference between longitudes of successive crossings of the equator on the ascending node path is 335 degrees.

If you look at path E, the difference in ascending node longitudes is zero.

What this shows is the ground path for a geosynchronous satellite, not necessarily geostationary.

Remember we talked about that geosynchronous may have inclinations other than zero whereas geostationary.

In other words the satellite stays at a fixed point in in the sky.

The geostationary satellite has an inclination of zero, as well as a difference in longitudes of ascending node passes of zero degrees.

Now the next slide shows representative types of satellites that fly in these ground with these ground paths.

So look at these two charts. The two slides together.

And you'll get an idea of the type of mission that can be accomplished.

To fly a satellite for these paths that you see on these two charts.

This drawing shows for various types of missions with which you are probably familiar what the ground path looks like.

Now, most of them are fairly explanatory, remembering, of course, that this is a two dimensional view of the satellite ground path.

But if you take a look at the path shown is letter D, as in dog.

This is kind of a very interesting, um, orbit,

so that it represents a communications satellite flying in an orbit that was first designed by a Russian many, many years ago.

And the idea here was that a great deal of the Russian land masses in very northern latitudes,

in order to provide satellite communications to that part of the country.

It was not possible to use a geostationary satellite, because at the northern latitudes,

the look angle from a ground station to a satellite orbiting over the equator in a geostationary orbit would be very,

very low in mountainous terrain or in terrain where there are other obstructions,

and a ground based antenna would be looking very close to the horizon trying to see us geostationary satellite.

And that's not going to work very well. So the Russians designed a small Nya type of orbit, which results in a very eccentric orbit.

If you look on the notes pages, the centricity is 0.75 and the inclination is 63.4 degrees.

What happens now is from a ground station perspective, as the satellite passes to apogee,

it appears to be relatively stationary in the sky because it's very far out,

and the orbit is so centric that the satellite, as it approaches apogee, is virtually motionless or very close to it in the sky.

But as it passes through apogee on its way back to perigee, then the orbital speed,

remember, we're going to be talking about Kepler's laws in the next chapter.

The orbital speed increases in the satellite as it approaches perigee comes very close to the Earth.

In fact, um, the the apogee here, as you see, is 26,600km, whereas the perigee is very low on the order of several hundred kilometers.

And that lets the satellites sweep through the low part of its orbit very rapidly,

and then head back to the far reaches of its orbit again, assuming a relatively, uh, low rate of motion in the sky for northern latitudes.

The Russians use this quite extensively for communications to the northern part

of the of the landmass by having several millennia satellites in the same orbit,

but phased differently so that as one satellite begins to move from its apogee point toward perigee.

Another satellite is just approaching, uh, a correction apogee and therefore takes over the duties of communications for those northern latitudes.

Quite an ingenious orbit. And there'll be some mathematics involved in developing this orbit that you should become familiar with,

because the Monier type of orbit is quite useful for various types of missions,

not only communications, but for example, suppose you wanted to do early warning for missile launches over a particularly northern latitude landmass.

You might want to have that satellite hover, if you will, over that area.

And that would be a little interesting to do for any orbital type orbit type other than a highly elliptical heliocentric orbit.

So take a look at this chart. Uh, this drawing compared to the previous one,

to get an idea of the types of missions and the resulting ground paths that are

determined by the centricity and inclination of the low Earth orbiting satellites.

Going to begin a discussion now in section 8.5 about satellite relative motion.

In this particular case, look at figure eight, dash 41, page 187.

You'll see where we have two satellites in different orbits.

They may have the same characteristics of altitude and be the same eccentricity, but they have different inclinations.

And so here we have an example of a potential relative motion between these two satellites.

And it really only depends upon the inclination and the phasing of the satellites.

Now this could be important if you are planning a mission in which you want to have satellites in such orbits because you don't want them to bump.

And so there we're going to discuss a little bit about the satellite relative motion.

More in depth is covered in astro dynamics when, uh, we're dealing with a so-called Clohessy Wilshire equations,

which are relatively interesting and complex, because that is how a resupply vehicle,

for example, going to the International Space Station or when the space shuttle was flying,

when we have those two objects, two different objects in different orbits, but yet we want them to meet up.

So the relative motion is extremely important.

We have to know where are the other satellite is, when it's going to be in a particular place, and if we're going to be there at the same time.

And of course, what is the relative closing velocity between the two satellites?

So relative motion is extremely important if you want to do rendezvous and or proximity operations of satellites,

for example, you want to do resupply of a satellite by adding more fuel to it's.

Assume, for example, that it's a geostationary communication satellite that is performing very well,

but it's running out of fuel necessary to keep it in his allocated slot in the geosynchronous belt.

Geostationary belt. So you want to add fuel to it. You're going to send up a robotic spacecraft to meet up with a satellite and transfer a fuel.

Relative motion between the two satellites will become extremely important.

Here is another example of relative motion of satellites. This comes from figure eight dash 42 in your book.

In this particular case, the satellites have the same inclination, but their longitude of ascending nodes are different.

But that does mean that these two orbits are going to intersect.

For example, the GPS constellation. The satellites are in six different planes of orbits.

They are spaced the different longitudes of ascending nodes, but the inclinations are the same.

So the phasing between the satellites in adjacent orbits is very important.

You'll notice that as the inclination increases in these orbits, if you have multiple orbits, multiple planes of orbits,

the satellites will come very close to each other, closer to the poles, to the northern and southern poles of the orbit.

And this is very important if you don't want them to collide, but yet you want to have multiple satellites and constellations,

which will result in greater ground coverage and or greater revisit times on the ground.

So read through the math behind this type of information on page 187,

and you'll see how it's very important that we be able to know where the satellites are with respect to each other.

Continuing, you can look at the relative motion reference frame frame as shown in figure eight.

Dash 43. It may be advisable and sometimes to change your coordinate reference frame and

establish that as a moving reference frame with respect to the Earth at least,

but base it on a specific satellite. If you're trying to do a constellation of satellites moving with respect to each other, for example,

the uh Surrey Space Technology uh company or university in England has developed a constellation of what's called the disaster monitoring satellites.

And the purpose behind those satellites is to provide rapid revisit times over any specific area of the Earth in order to cover natural disasters.

And so the idea here is if you have multiple satellites, how do you maintain the relative position and knowledge of the positions of those satellites?

So this section in your textbook goes into a fair amount of detail.

And it also describes some of the other aspects of relative motion without getting into.

As I mentioned before, the classic Wiltshire very detailed mathematics about relative closing velocities and other parameters.

So this section will give you at least a an introduction to the necessity of determining constellations.

Satellite relative positions. Let us assume that you have communications satellites such as Globalstar or Iridium,

and you want to provide instantaneous access over very, very large areas of the Earth.

And the issue here now becomes, how can I relay communications data from a point on the ground for low Earth orbiting satellites,

where we know from first part of this chapter that the ground coverage area may be quite small, depending upon the altitude, the satellite.

And yet we still want to have that ground coverage area provide, for example,

an observer communication to a totally different area on the Earth, perhaps even on the other side of the Earth.

How do we do that? And the idea here is that we need to be able to understand inter satellite visibility in our constellation.

We need this in order to determine how many satellites will need in a particular constellation,

flying at a specific altitude in order to have coverage of globally, if so to speak.

So the idea here is to look at the requirements for determining inter satellite visibility.

Again we're dealing with spherical geometry. But figure eight dash 47 goes into a little bit more detail on how to do this.

So read through these because it definitely does have an impact on space mission analysis.

If this is your mission to provide communication globally from low Earth orbiting satellites.

The next section that we're going to be discussing is mapping and pointing errors

associated with the fact that we're dealing with a satellite flying over spherical Earth.

We've already talked about communications issues where our ground station might not be directly below the satellite,

and yet we have to communicate to it. So where is it?

When will we be in sight of the ground station?

If we kind of flip things around, if we're going to observe the ground with an imaging system, where is that target that we have to look at?

When will we see it? How long will we see it? And all of that hinges upon adequate knowledge of where the satellite is and where it's pointing.

And so the discussion of mapping and pointing errors is very germane to our whole topic of mission planning.

And that's what we're going to cover in the remaining portions of this chapter.

This chart shows some of the major contributors to Mapping Error.

One source that we have to consider is the fact that the Earth isn't round.

Although the spacecrafts orbit. Well, usually we're going to consider that orbit to be circular,

but it's circular with regard to the center of mass of the Earth, the gravitational attractive center.

So as the satellite goes around the Earth, it's going to run into issues of oblate ness of the Earth.

Now, typically, this uncertainty and target altitude is approximately on the order of one kilometre typically for most targets.

And this particular chart shows how if we consider that target altitude error,

then we can see what happens as the spacecraft elevation as seen from the ground varies from straight down,

looking down nadir wise, closer to about 80 degrees of elevation angle.

So take a look at this and you can see another source of mapping error.

Contributors to our problem of imaging from spacecraft.

Figure 851 on your text. Page 195 continues with the discussion of pointing and mapping errors.

But in this particular case, we're talking about pointing errors.

And you'll notice that at a low elevation angles, the pointing errors can be in fact considerably larger than when you're looking straight down.

And this only stands to reason. The idea behind this particular chart is that if you are dealing with, for example, a communication system,

a lot of times that will limit you to angles above a certain value from the horizon, and that's due to terrain, um, manmade obstacles, etc.

But the idea here is that typically communications systems limit themselves to greater than five degree elevation angles,

so that the pointing error becomes less. Also consider, for example,

an GPS receiver is designed so that it ignores satellite positions that it has determined from ephemeris information are below,

perhaps 5 or 10 degrees above the horizon at the viewer's location, and as, um, a function of the system itself.

So look carefully at this drawing and you'll see that it compared to figure eight dash 50

pointing errors are much more much less sensitive to elevation angle than mapping errors.

And that's something that you have to, of course, consider in the design of your space mission,

particularly if you're trying to image the ground or communicate with the ground.

In. This refers back to the drawing. Uh, a couple of slides ago showing the graphic of the satellite over the Earth,

and it describes the particular kinds of errors that we've been talking about, the mapping and pointing errors.

So look at the definitions on this slide and then compare it with a graph that shows the angles and the uh,

position of the satellite on that previous chart. And you'll get an idea of the types of errors and how they contribute to the problems we will have.

And getting decent information from an imaging system isn't as simple as just taking a picture.

We have to be aware of all these various types of mapping and pointing errors.

Mathematically speaking,

here is the summary table of the various types of errors and the formula for determining the magnitude of those particular errors.

So take a look at this one. Some numbers that you can or some um samples to see what the magnitudes of the errors might be.

And that might be a good thing to be able to do in the future.

He briefly mentioned the types of issues involved with pointing accuracy and the errors associated with pointing.

And here is an example of the type of attitude control.

Remember we discussed that as part of the housekeeping problems for satellite drivers.

Well here are the various types of attitude control and sensing that satellites might have.

And you can see the accuracy level over on the left side.

And therefore that can contribute dramatically to the pointing errors associated with

the particular satellites that are using these methods of attitude determination.

Next session will deal with chapter nine. And this is Orbitz and Astro Dynamics.

It's going to be a pretty intense chapter, so we'll cover as much detail as we can.

But as you see from the opening page on 197, we'll be talking about Kepler's laws,

the various orbits of that we're going to be dealing with, and our mission planning.

And that will include effects on those orbits.

Because of such things as the Earth not being around other bodies, such as the moon and sun, what effect they have on the orbits of our our plans.

Space missions are also going to look at orbital maneuvers.

So it's going to be pretty interesting but intense session next week for our next time for chapter nine.

Now, since this week we covered chapters seven and eight.

There will be homework assignments for both chapters, but for chapter seven, I it's not that intense of a homework assignment.

So I'm going to ask that you get them both done in this next week period.

So the idea would be read through your material of chapter seven, look at and work homework for chapter seven.

And then since there's a clear break between 7 and 8, then go on to chapter eight or section eight and material.

And once you have that completed, then you'll be in a good position to do homework.

Number three all this is because we have a lot to cover this semester,

and I want to get these basics down soon so that we can then go on and deal with the mission planning itself.

So homework number two and number three will be do one week from this current week, one week from Monday.

But do not let it go until the very end.

And please just look at the first part first and do that homework.

And then go on to the second part of our material and do the homework assignments, dealing with the chapters in chapter eight.

Then we'll be in a good position to go on to chapter nine.

