[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Okay, here we are with week number two. We're going to start off this class with, uh, discussion of the space mission concept definition.

We're going to define what it is or what we want to do for this mission.

We're going to have to then analyze the mission to see how we're going to do it,

not just what we're going to do, but let's come up with some ideas on how we might accomplish the mission.

Amongst those ideas, there will be several alternatives that we're going to need to look at based on cost and schedule and difficulty.

And so we'll come up with some trade studies that will help us define the way we're going to proceed with the mission.

And then once we get all those things settled, we're going to come up with some detailed requirements,

processes, how we're going to go ahead and proceed with the development of the mission of the mission,

all the various formal requirements that will need to be accomplished over a given timeline,

so we can check up on the process and the progress of our mission development.

I will also then look into the specifications, their formal specifications, um, for developing any kind of a program.

Space missions have specifically, uh, space oriented specifications.

And we'll look at those. And then lastly, we'll talk about some of the standards that are available by which you can judge the performance and the

progress of your system as it goes from the mission analysis to trade studies all the way to production.

These first few chapters up through and including chapter 6th May seem like just a lot of reading,

and they're not really particularly engineering oriented,

except for the fact that they lay the groundwork for the technically detailed mission requirements and system design attributes.

So we'll be looking at from then on. But you need to be aware of what the ground rules are, all the requirements for specific types of space missions.

And that's what's discussed in these first six chapters.

They look like they're more administrative in nature.

But I guess you you might be right in that, because no mission is really it's strictly a technical mission design.

You have to be doing that design in view of other constraints such as funding and requirements, timelines, trade studies.

And that's what's discussed in these first six chapters.

So read through these chapters, looking at the tables, looking at the highlights of how space missions are actually run.

And then beginning in chapter seven, we'll start talking about the actual engineering aspects of it,

dealing with the environment, etc. that the space mission has to operate in.

That's not very good English, but that's the way it is in any event.

Um, please do read through these things. There's a lot of pages involved, but the important things to remember are summarized in the tables,

and that's the type of thing you should be aware of.

And, uh, in your job as being a mission designer.

The textbook uses as an example of a space mission, a hypothetical system called Viasat.

It was originally proposed some years back, but at that time it was going to be pretty expensive to build,

so it was never really built in the form that you will read about in the text.

Nevertheless, the concepts of Behind the Fire Sad mission are part of the normal space mission type of process development process.

So here's a graphic that shows basically how the mission concept takes into account a

number of different things that we're going to have to consider not only for Viasat,

but for all space missions. So take a look at this graphic.

Read the section in the book that deals with the space mission architecture,

so that you see how all these various pieces and parts will come to play in defining the mission itself,

and then proceeding toward the development activities. This slide simply shows some of the things behind the concept, exploration and definition here.

For example, on the left side of the chart,

it shows the various needs that have to be accomplished because not to generate the potential requirements based on all these various things.

And so on the right hand side of this slide. And it talks about the concept development in order to satisfy those needs, the potential requirements.

This table in your book on page 74 outlines some of the problems associated with space mission analysis, particularly the timelines required.

If you look just at the very first line. A particular mission will have certain funding issues associated with it,

but at the same time, and often in conflicting um situations, are when it is required.

For example, way back in the Voyager spacecraft days, the alignment of the planets in the solar system to enable the Voyagers to,

um, pass by all of the planets in the outer solar system.

Was very stringent. It was only going to happen every 100 years or so.

And so there was a very hard date that was required to have that system ready.

If it wasn't ready at that time, the entire mission would have been scrapped or at least severely downscale.

So the need date is a definite issue when you're designing a mission.

You must, as an engineer, then be able to tell the users that by if they need the system by a specific date,

that there are going to be constraints on the mission payload or other technical parameters.

This is all part of the space mission analysis. Funding also, of course, is a big issue.

Just recently there have been some spacecraft programs that NASA is coming up with that.

Um, when they were started were quite grandiose, if you will, in their design requirements.

But funding has limited the number and type of different sensors to be put on the various spacecraft.

So here's your juggling situation. The users require certain types of data for their mission, at least in their minds, to be satisfied.

And as an engineer, it's the job to accommodate all those needs,

and yet be realistic enough to know that they have to be met within funding constraints and specifically mission timelines.

So if you look at the rest of this chart, you'll see some of the other conflicting requirements that are necessary.

I think you all have come across some of these things in your daily life, but here it is spelled out that there is no free lunch.

As an engineer, you may be called upon to perform a quick look at a particular mission to see whether, in fact, it is even feasible to do that.

If you look at this slide, you'll notice that it's divided essentially into two different sections.

The top part is the quick look with the limited detail.

And then the next part is more detailed complex trade studies.

So if we look at the feasibility assessment,

you may be asked as an engineer to quickly determine whether some particular mission is even possible to do.

And if it is how much approximately this is called back of the envelope type of discussions.

I'm sure you've all run into this before,

but just give me a quick back of the envelope cost and weight estimation so that the mission designers can have something to go on,

and the managers can, in fact determine whether this this particular mission is even possible within budget constraints and time constraints, etc.

Once you have past that type of benchmark, then the next step would be to take those back of the envelope calculations.

And now let's perform some more detailed trade studies to see whether there are some

alternatives that might still allow the mission to be accomplished within different,

and perhaps cheaper budget constraints or timelines.

So this chart does provide a a way of looking at a mission at a high level.

And then okay, it looks like it might be workable.

So let's go on and get some more detail to see whether, in fact,

our back of the envelope calculations really will help us come up with a reasonable, uh, estimate on the time and cost of this mission.

If you look carefully through the information on this slide, most of it will make sense to you.

For example, some of the system drivers that will determine the cost and schedule and things like that are shown on the left hand side of the chart.

The simplest ones are how big is this spacecraft going to be?

That, in fact can drive the, uh, be limited by the shroud that goes on the top of the rocket.

The available throw weight of the booster.

In other words, how big of a booster can we get? How much is that going to cost?

And things like that on orbit weight. How are we going to control the attitude of the spacecraft?

How are we going to, um, achieve the desired orbit?

And a number of other things that you can see are, in fact, logical system drivers all the way down to the bottom one about operations.

Who's going to run this thing, who's going to monitor it, where are the ground sites going to be?

How are we going to get data from the ground sites back to the control center?

All these things are system drivers for any space mission.

As part of the job of a space mission engineer,

one of the types of things you must always be looking at are alternative architectures to accomplish the mission.

Here are five different steps that are typically looked at for alternatives.

If you look at a obviously the ability to identify those particular elements of the mission that can be subject to trade studies, maybe.

And as a chosen B, you can identify some main options for each of these elements.

So there on the table, if you look at the rest of these things on this chart,

you'll see that now it's the job of the engineer to look at the trade studies, the available options, try to eliminate unrealistic combinations.

Remember talking about a mission that is most likely very complex.

So just because a particular subsystem might be subject to trade study where you could reduce

the cost or the power or the weight that might have impact on some of the other subsystems.

So it's important to look not just that a, you know, at a microscopic view, but as a macroscopic view of the entire mission,

and then look for other alternatives that can, in fact, have a big impact on how the mission is accomplished.

From the generic trade study table.

On the preceding slide, we now look at for specifically the case of the fire set example.

And here are some of the trade study areas that we would look at for this mission

that the textbook follows from the onset of the mission throughout the end of it.

You'll notice also that the appropriate chapters in the book are also noted here, and we will eventually get to all of those.

So take a look at this. You might even one nail this up on your wall.

So that as we proceed through the text, you can see how we relate back to these various areas for system trade studies.

This is a good summary of some areas in which trade offs can be achieved, and you'll see that some of them can and some of them can't.

For example, yeah, the mission concept, it's open to some alternative approaches for accomplishing the mission.

But the basic subject of the mission itself is pretty well designed or defined.

The principal investigator you'll you'll come across this term and in reading, not only in this class but in other scientific endeavors.

The P.I. principal investigator came up with an idea, and that idea was what he used to go solicit funds for his idea.

And if it was approved now at the principal investigator as his marching orders, you came to us with a particular idea.

We approved the idea. Now go off and do it.

And so the Pi is saying, fine, I'll do it.

I know there are trade offs and constraints associated with it,

but the basic goal that I have in mind is well-defined, and that's the direction that we're proceeding.

So yes, the payload can be subject to trade offs.

It can be designed a little bit differently to accomplish the mission.

The bus certainly itself is subject to trade studies, the launch system maybe not so much, because if you end up with a mission,

a payload that is of a specific weight and you're trying to put that payload into a specific type of orbit,

you are today constrained to only certain types of boosters that are available within a cost constraints that you have available to your mission.

Can the orbit be traded off? Well, perhaps, but maybe not so much.

So instead of saying yes, I would kind of put yes, maybe the ground system,

perhaps it could be a trade off between the more frequent data transfers or using,

um, ground stations, ground systems that are shared with other systems.

So you have a scheduling issue there. Can the communication architecture be traded off?

Well, maybe not, because the mission operation may dictate when that's that payload will be in view of the ground stations.

And therefore the communication system has to get the data to the ground station at a specific time.

And the last item on this slide. Can the mission operation itself be subject to a trade study?

Well, yes, perhaps it can. There are certain missions which can be conducted in what's called lights out situations.

That's where the mission itself is.

Um, subject to software being uploaded to, for example, um, an Earth observation mission.

You can upload software commands to the satellites saying at this time you'll be over this area.

And so you need to take this many observations.

And if that timeline is loaded into the satellite, then the engineers can go home and turn off the lights.

However, usually in a lights out situation like that,

there are triggers so that there if there are any anomalies that occur on board the satellite, that the ground station automatically can,

in fact, uh, call one of the engineers by virtue of a beeper or, uh,

message system or something like that, to come and take a look at what's going on.

So lights out operation certainly can be a trade area for mission operations and therefore the cost.

If you don't have to have a crew on duty, that's going to save you money.

Now that you've looked at what the definitions of some of these trade study areas are, here is an example for the fire set system.

And you will notice that it goes into such things as the payload options, the spacecraft bus options, orbit options,

and a number of different trade studies that will be applied as we go through the text to the fire set system.

With all these trade offs that are inevitable in the system design.

Here is a trade process table that looks at some of the parameters that have interaction with other.

Parameters. And if you look in that last column, you'll see that we are have.

Laid out for us in this textbook at least where some of these these issues are discussed in the text.

You'll notice in the Viasat two example, the middle column.

Now we're beginning to get into true engineering aspects of our space mission.

We're looking at orbit issues, power issues, thermal issues, environment issues.

And so this table is the first one so far in the text that we'll give you, as an engineer,

a look ahead as to the types of things that we're going to have to be discuss.

We will be discussing in order to accomplish this space mission.

So this is a look ahead insofar as some of the system trade processes are concerned and their impact on the mission,

and vice versa, the mission requirements and its impact on the trade studies.

Chapter six. In your book, beginning with table six, one identifies the issues that are going to be run across as we develop the requirements process.

You will notice that there are a number of things that are in the subsystem and subsystem requirements.

All these things are based on the fundamental mission objectives as it shows in this slide.

We're going to come up with some constraints, some operational requirements, some functional requirements.

And all of these things need to be identified and satisfied.

We're going to have to identify these requirements and then somehow figure out how to satisfy the requirements.

And you'll notice that typically the requirements are satisfied by one of three different types of things.

Either the function of identifying what has to be done, the performance requirement where we will specify how well that function has to be performed,

and then how are we going to verify that the function is actually operating as it should.

That in turn is broken down into three different parts inspection, test and analysis.

We either have to inspect it like you would with code to make sure that it's working properly.

Testing for hardware, you need to make sure it's going to perform properly.

And then finally by analysis where you want to actually do either inspection or test,

but by reasoning you will look at the identified system or subsystem and say, yes, analytically this thing should work.

Once the concept is validated, we have to make sure that we have tailored our system and segment definitions so that everything fits together.

We're going to look at some preliminary internal interface requirements, sometimes called ICDs, the interface control document.

We're going to look at some of the preliminary standards that we might employ to make sure that the system will function properly.

Look at our preliminary requirements and how they flow down into actual hardware and software.

We'll look at integrating the system for testing when we're through by subsystems.

Transition from subsystem testing to system testing.

And look at some validation. Validating technologies some way that we might be able to actually make sure that the testing that we have done is true.

Then the last part of this slide talks about the design and implementation.

We're going to look at the detailed requirements. Now after we've done our preliminary requirements we're going to develop formal design documentation

and interface control that we use for testing and integrating the various subsystems.

Finally, we'll demonstrate and verify the overall system.

And then to complete the process. We'll develop test procedures and reports for subsequent iterations of the system itself.

So here is the requirements baseline. The first thing we need to do is make sure that we know what the customer wants.

So that means we have to know exactly who the customer is.

If you're dealing with a military, you may be dealing with, for example,

Air Force Space Command as a procuring agent, but they may not be the absolute ultimate user.

So you need to understand who the actual customer is and what they want.

Then you need to identify and prioritize their objectives.

And as you evolve heard, sometimes the customer changes their mind in the middle of things.

And that means that the designer has to go back to the beginning or some preceding stage and reinvent things.

So you need to be able to identify the needs and objectives at the beginning.

Define your internal and external constraints. What kind of dollar figure are we talking about?

What kind of timeline are we talking about? The requirements from the customer.

And so as you look through the rest of these things on this particular slide,

you will see all these steps above require some iterations with preceding activities necessary to both make sure that your assumptions are correct.

Make sure your customer hasn't changed his mind somewhere along the line.

Make sure that the technology that you propose is actually achievable.

Don't tell the customer you can do something. Betting on processes that may not have been developed yet.

So all of these requirements form the requirements baseline.

Your book succinctly discusses table 62 on page 107, but it bears repeating that the top level mission requirements there.

There are three basic types of these requirements. As you see in the and the.

On page 107, the functional requirements are those that are levied on us,

that tell us what this system is supposed to do to satisfy the customer, and how well it must do that.

The next type of requirement is the operational requirement.

How is it going to be used?

Is it going to be used by an intermediate customer or public customer or military customer, or is it going to be used only for internal use?

And then of course, the third one is constraints. Do we have cost constraints?

Well, of course we do. Do we have a schedule? Yes we do.

If you may remember, the schedule for that Voyager concept that I mentioned before,

that had to do with the alignment of the planets in the solar system.

That schedule was hard and fast.

There was nothing that could be done to change it. Certainly you're not going to move the planets around.

So schedule is certainly one of those constraints that has to be taken into account.

Regulations. Now here's an interesting thing. There are today regulations that are in place, as you may know, for uh, orbital, uh,

space missions, in that it's been agreed internationally that low Earth orbiting systems,

when they reach their end of life, must be orbited or otherwise disposed of so that the issue of space debris is mitigated.

In fact, a mission ended spacecraft must be orbited within 25 years,

and so that requires us to have an outer space mission design some type of mechanism

to assure that the satellite will in fact deorbit within that time frame,

whether it's additional fuel so that we can cause a a burn of the propulsion system to lower the altitude of the spacecraft,

therefore, it in putting it into more dense atmosphere and causing the drag to decay the orbit rapidly,

or a solar sail that may accomplish the same thing by increasing the drag,

or somehow otherwise putting that satellite into an orbit where it's not going to cause any issues.

Most likely it'll be due orbited for geo, geosynchronous or geostationary communications satellites.

That's a different story. There's so much energy required to deorbit a satellite from that altitude that the accepted way of disposing of

an end of life communications satellite is to boost its orbit slightly higher on the order of 1 or 200km maximum,

into what's called a graveyard orbit that gets the satellite out of the orbital plane

of the geosynchronous geostationary communications satellites that are still active.

And yet it doesn't require so much additional propellant to be on board.

That makes the weight of the system, um, a severe issue for the mission itself.

So there are international regulations that are required.

Law and policy must be adhered to politically.

Oh, there's a big one.

As you may know, uh, a lot of the inner planet, inner planets of the solar system, space probes use solar panels for their energy source.

However, that's limited for the, um, the outer planets, the gas giants.

There isn't enough solar energy at those distances to enable a spacecraft to actually function properly.

Therefore, the outer planets have been explored by space missions that use, uh, radioactive power supplies.

RTG as it's called, radio thermal generators.

Those generators use some type of, uh, a rear radiator radioactive decay to generate heat,

which is then turned by thermocouples into electrical energy.

That's a big deal, because there's a lot of, um, pushback for using the plutonium based RTG.

In fact, the Cassini spacecraft and the New Horizons spacecraft, which went off course to Pluto, use those types of power supplies,

and in the mission for those satellites required them to get a gravitational boost to view, if possible, by multiple flybys of the inner planets.

And in fact, the Cassini spacecraft, one on its way to Saturn, passed very close to the Earth.

And there were people who are very vocally concerned about, well, what if that satellite doesn't graze the Earth's gravitational field,

but in fact impacts the Earth and spreads, um, plutonium debris all over the place is very, very toxic material.

And so there was a lot of pushback on, um, to NASA on their choice of that power supply, but there was no other choice.

You couldn't use solar energy at that distance.

So an RTG was the only way to do it. That did cause us a lot of, um, public.

Well, I wouldn't say a lot, but some public outcry about NASA's use of that.

So you have to be aware of the political aspects of your mission, as well as whether it's an international mission or not.

As you may know, for example, communications satellites are in various orbital slots.

The slots above particular countries are subject to auctions.

A country, for example, maybe over in Africa, which has no need for or desire to have communications satellites.

They have, by international law, a reserved spot above their country, which is theirs.

And so if I wanted to put a communications satellite in that particular geographic slot to accomplish some particular mission,

I have to negotiate with that particular country to buy if that particular area of the orbital plane.

So there are a lot of international laws dealing with this.

Recently, the U.S. has made, um,

some headlines because of the satellite navigation systems that are in orbit or will be in orbit that pass over the U.S. for example,

I have a a GPS receiver made by Garmin that also incorporates Glonass.

That's the Russian satellite navigation system. It has that receiver in this little tiny box.

Your new iPhones have a Glonass receiver.

Now wait a minute. The US Federal Communications Commission.

Says that. Well, wait a minute. You can't broadcast signals to us users that aren't licensed by the U.S. FCC.

So there have been some, uh, head knockings about that.

Who owns the right to transmit a radio signal from their satellite down to the Earth?

If it's over a sovereign country, does that sovereign country have the right to say who is allowed to do that or not?

So there are all kinds of constraints in an international world, um, considerations for these types of things.

Let's see. The last one is, of course, the, um, sponsoring organization.

What right do they have? Well, they're paying for this thing, so they have the right to say, oh, we can't afford that,

or I want you to use my money, but I need this particular aspect to be added to your space mission.

So bottom line, there are an awful lot of constraints and requirements that have to be dealt with.

When we're designing a space mission, it's not just an engineer turn loose to accomplish a mission.

There are all kinds of legal things international ramifications, political cost financing and things like that.

They go into the overall mission. In addition to the top level mission requirements that you saw on the preceding slide.

We have the aspects of operability, and that's more engineering than it is scheduling and cost,

etc. so take a look at these aspects of operability and they will become important as we go further into the design of our space mission.

Rather than simply reiterate what's all in section 6.6.

I just direct you to take a look at some of the the extra tabs on the textbook where you can go look at some of these standards.

There are quite a few of them that, as you can see reading through this section,

it's most of the hardware testing actually ends up traceable back to the National Institute of Standards and Time up in Boulder, Colorado.

That is where most of the electrical and time standards are kept.

In fact, electrical and radio frequency testing equipment all must be traceable back to the nest standards for any type of production type of system.

It is through these developments of the standards that we can assure our customer

that the device that we are going to build the spacecraft functioning well,

in fact, meet their requirements. Okay.

So far, we've discussed some of the administrative aspects in dealing with mission analysis and design for our space systems.

So with these rules and guidelines and considerations in our back pocket,

now it's time to get on to the the enjoyable parts of the textbook where we started looking at the detail,

the engineering aspects of space mission analysis.

Chapter seven and eight deal with the space environment and that includes radiation, solar pressure,

all kinds of interesting things that we have to be concerned with as we take a requirement from

our users and generate space mission design satellite designs based on those requirements.

So chapter seven deals with that. Chapter eight is uh, goes into how we select the appropriate orbit for our our space mission.

And in order to do that, we have to cover some of the basics dealing with orbit orbital mechanics.

That's nothing that's severely, um, detailed or difficult to handle, but it's information that we need to know.

And developing our toolbox for how we go about building and flying a space mission.

So there will be some mathematical homework dealing with chapter eight, but only that which is necessary,

so that you get a good idea of the considerations necessary to, uh,

satisfy the mission requirements and select the appropriate, uh, orbit, altitude, timing, etc.

And these are dealing with Kepler's laws as well as the Newtonian physics.

So be careful when you read chapter eight not to gloss over some of the math.

I'll have some examples that will be added in chapter eight, uh, to chapter eight in our class notes for next week.

And after you have digested the information from chapters seven and eight, then I will,

um, ask for you to apply some of that information in the way of homework.

So I'll be issuing the homework simultaneously with the reading material,

but certainly go through the reading material and the class notes first before you tackle the homework.

The homework one will not be that, uh, lengthy or difficult.

That wouldn't give you time to read first and then do the homework.

So chapter seven and eight don't get too far behind, because now we're getting into the engineering aspects of our space mission analysis,

analysis and design, which of course is the basic purpose of our class.

