[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Right. Greetings and welcome to Space Mission Analysis SPC 5045.

This first week we will be covering a number of administrative items.

As you see on these this slide in the next few slides,

including a syllabus and an overview of the class description and the goals that we are setting for this class.

And then in fact, we launch into the first couple of chapters of our book called Space Mission Analysis and Design the News mad by microcosm.

I hope you've all had a chance to acquire that textbook.

It is different than previous editions of SMD, so please be sure you have this big £7 book that's quite heavy, has a lot of material in it,

most of which we will cover in some amount of detail, varying detail depending upon the subject,

some of which we will not spend a great deal of time on.

Because this is an engineering class, and my intention is to focus on the technical and engineering aspects of space,

mission analysis, as well as design some of the concepts.

I will be quickly looking over our cost analysis and administrative type functions,

which for this class are going to take a second seat to the engineering and technical topics.

So let us proceed on. Take a look through this first few, these first few slides.

You'll see where we're going.

The syllabus is relatively dynamic and that as I come across new material, updated material things that I think we should emphasize,

I may in fact, from time to time change the syllabus around just a little bit.

But in any event, let's get started with space mission analysis and design.

Okay. Here is a description of what we're going to be doing in this class.

And remember that this is an engineering class.

As I mentioned in the very first slide that we'll be looking at.

But in a very high level,

some of the information in this mad textbook that is not really geared toward the engineering aspects that I want to emphasize.

Uh, we'll be covering briefly such things as the management and cost accounting types of things,

but only in so much as they apply to the analysis of our mission itself.

But basically, what we need to do is start off with what the mission requirements are.

What are we trying to do with our space mission? Those mission requirements are generally for engineering people,

broken up into specifications and configuration control documents and things like that.

So we'll be discussing mission requirements and how we identify those requirements,

what we do with them and then how they are implemented in the design.

The next thing we'll be looking at is the environment in which the satellite or other space mission is going to operate.

What is that environment going to do to the design?

Are we going to have to deal with thermal issues or long range communications and things like this?

In order to understand the environment, we're going to need to look at the orbit.

And if we're flying more than one satellite that has to work with other satellites,

then we're going to need to talk about a constellation of satellites.

So orbit and constellation considerations are very important in order to meet our mission objectives.

So that's going to be a very important subject to discuss.

And then of course the subsystems that make up the spacecraft subsystems include such things as communications,

uh, thermal control, propulsion, attitude control, attitude determination.

All these subsystems must work together in order for the spacecraft or the satellite to meet the mission objectives.

So payload design is going to be a very, um, intense discussion about our space mission analysis.

How do we design that payload? Um, according to that, also the subsystems will include propulsion, as I mentioned, attitude determination and control.

How are we going to know where to point this, these satellite or spacecraft.

Are we going to know how to get the satellite to a specific place where it can do its mission?

Onboard data processing is going to be necessary because as you will see when we talk about communications for some missions,

the communications time that the satellite has in view of the ground station is going to be very limited.

So if there's a lot of data that has been collected in order to meet these mission requirements,

that data is going to have to be transmitted to the ground to the users in a very short time.

Well, how do we do that? Perhaps we should process some of that data on the spacecraft before we try to send it to the ground,

in order to limit the communications requirements,

we're going to need, of course, a power supply to generate electricity to perform mission requirements such as imaging,

communications, attitude control, things like this.

So power supply requirements as a subsystem are very important.

And then next, certainly not last or least is the thermal and structural issues dealing with building our spacecraft.

How well will that spacecraft have to deal with thermal issues?

Will it be in the sun most of the time,

or it's going to have to reflect a lot of heat so that it doesn't overheat the internal components of the spacecraft?

Or if the spacecraft goes into eclipse periods where it's no longer heated by the sun,

how are we going to keep it warm enough to carry out its mission requirements?

Is the structure sufficient to maintain integrity of the spacecraft during the launch?

During the early orbit operations, during subsequent orbit changes and things like this where will certainly be known.

Necessary to in order to design the structure to maintain the integrity of the payload.

So all of these things go into making up the structure and therefore the method by which our missions requirements are met.

So we'll just proceed on. And we're going to start looking at some of these mission requirements in the first few chapters of our textbook.

Here is the grading policy for this class for the semester.

As you can see here, there are going to be essentially four major areas of grades.

Homework sets. And before you ask how many homework sets will there be?

Well, typically six, seven, maybe eight throughout the semester.

It's hard to tell. I provide homework when it's necessary to make sure that the concepts have been discussed in the class.

Material need to be, uh, fully explained and experimented with.

So there will be homework sets that may just crop up when we come across material that I think.

Well, wait a minute. We should explore some of the math behind this or some of the other concepts.

Typically, as I say, however, there should be homework about every other week.

We'll also have the midterm exam. As you can see, this is a take home exam.

Of course, since this is an online class, the exam will be provided as incidental as the homework.

I'll provide the exam on the Sunday evening prior to a week of material reading so that as you read through the material,

you'll see the homework, how it applies to the material and for the exam.

As you read through the exam, you will see backwards how the exam material reflects the information that we've already covered.

So the midterm exam will cover, of course, the first eight weeks or so of class,

the final exam, obviously another take home exam will cover the material since the midterm.

However, since during the first part of the semester, we will be developing tools to use during our space mission analysis.

And because of that, the final exam will make use of those tools to cover the material since the midterm exam.

So that in a way, in a nutshell, is the way the final exam will be.

Both of those exams, incidentally, will be one week in duration.

As I mentioned, they will be posted on the Sunday evening prior to a week of material or exam work.

They will be due no later, no later than 5 p.m. Mountain time on the Monday following the Sunday in which they have been posted, plus a week.

So let me make that clear. It didn't appear clear to me.

I will post the exams and the homework on a Sunday evening.

You will have one week to work on the homework and the exams following that week.

The homework and or exams will be due no later than 5 p.m. on the Monday.

So that's one week plus a few hours, and then the exams and homework will be due no later than 5 p.m.

Should you be on travel or other extenuating circumstances for either the homework or the exams?

You must let me know as soon as possible so that we can reschedule for you when those items will be due.

If there's no rational reason for the exams being late,

then I'm fortunately to make sure that everything is done according to the graduate school requirements.

We need to consider a deduction in the points, and I will have to deduct like five points for each day that you might be late.

If there have been no prior discussions about rescheduling,

and I think you will find this kind of typical with classes is that they are due when they are due,

and if there is no reason for delaying that, then there has to be some kind of a deduction.

The term project will round out the four major areas of grades for the semester.

The term project is in the form of a term paper, which will be a reverse engineering of an existing space mission,

or a new space mission that may not have ever been done, but you think that it would be interesting to do.

And so in that case, you would produce a top level discussion of the requirements for the mission and how that mission would be accomplished.

So two two separate ways of attacking this term.

Project one is a complete reverse engineering of the as built space mission that may be in existence or have already been in existence,

and reverse engineer how it got back to the requirements.

So that's one way. And the other one is, as I mentioned, a new mission that you have thought of.

That would be interesting, in which case you apply the tools that we will have learned in this semester to designing at a top level the space mission.

So those four items homework, midterm, final and term project equally contribute to the final grade.

Below on this slide you will see the grade scale that is used by the SPC department.

And this will be held to in our class also.

So each assignment whether it's homework or midterm will be graded in the term of points.

The points then will be added and referred back to this scale at the conclusion of the semester.

So with that, let us continue on with our space mission analysis and we'll be looking at the schedule next.

And as I mentioned before, the schedule is pretty much to be adhered to.

But occasionally I will slide things around a little bit when I come across information that I think necessitates

delaying a scheduled topic so that we can go on and discuss in more detail some new type of information.

So let's take a look now at the schedule. Continuing on with our overview.

I just want to point out that, as usual, the slides are a top level view of the material that we're going to be presenting,

and I will be augmenting much of the material with narrative,

and I will be adding from time to time material that I've collected from other sources that is germane to our study.

So the textbook is essentially the basis for our class, but it will be augmented by a great many other things as we go through.

And I do invite you, as you are certainly engineering students, as you come across information that you think might be pertinent to our class.

Please send it to me and I'll consider adding it, and we'll press on from there as it shows on this slide.

We will be requiring some type of mathematics to understand how to analyze and design our space mission.

I'm not looking for a major, uh, course of study person from calculus, an advanced mathematics or advanced physics.

But certainly by this time you have all been exposed to and become somewhat familiar with basic differential equations.

And the reason for that requirement is that when we start talking about orbital mechanics, we're talking about velocity and position and time.

And as all you all know, the first derivative of position.

The is velocity, the next derivative of that second derivative of position D2X over dt squared is acceleration.

All of those concepts deal with orbits.

And orbits of course are required for our space mission.

So to that extent, be familiar with the ability to at least take a couple of differential equations from now, from time to time.

Basic physics means that you have an understanding of power and force and acceleration, Newton's laws and things like that.

So that's the type of physics that we'll be discussing as we go along.

That's about it as far as the requirements are concerned.

Continuing on with her over the overview.

Homework and exams for the class may require the use of some type of computer tools, such as Excel or Matlab or math,

CAD, etc. or you can certainly do things by hand if you choose to use a computer tool such as those mentioned here,

please include that code or the Excel spreadsheet as an appendix to your homework so that if our answers differ,

I can take a look at your computer program or the tool that you use to see where our answers differ and try to figure out what happened there.

If you're doing things by hand, certainly you can do that. And the only thing I would request then is be sure that the math that you include, uh,

on your homework paper is sufficiently clear so that I can follow the steps through.

And that's essentially, of course, what I would be doing with the computer tools.

And also the final exam, as it shows here, is going to relate to items covered after the midterm exam.

And the midterm exam will focus on the information that we are using to build the tools,

or to fill our toolbox with the correct tools to be able to do the space mission analysis,

uh, for various types of missions, which will be focusing on in the second part of the class.

The next bullet just says that these slides are certainly talking points.

I will be augmenting the slide material and the textbook material with sources of information that I come across from time to time.

And I would certainly invite you, if you find information that you think is appropriate to the class,

send it to me and I'll see about including it in the in the class notes or as an additional, uh, posting.

So the idea here is we're all in this together, and I know each of you has a different background and may,

in fact, have information that everybody else would like to benefit from and share.

I will also, from time to time, be including web pages.

But primarily what I'll do in that case is just provide the link to those web pages.

In that case, then you can go use the link to find the material yourself.

I won't bother trying to copy it.

A lot of things are happening in the field of space mission analysis now nowadays, so there will be a lot of new information that comes almost weekly,

and I try to include all that pertinent information so that our mission

analysis stays up to date with what's going on in this field of space missions.

You will notice from the syllabus that at the very end of the semester, there will be a term paper, uh, otherwise known as term project.

And as it shows on this slide, the topic is your choice based on the principles that we've discovered in our space mission analysis discussions.

So you can choose to do this term paper in one of two flavors.

One flavor is to take an existing space mission that you might read about or be interested in, and reverse engineer it.

That means go back to the mission requirements for that specific mission and applying the tools that we developed during the class.

Reverse engineer the final product all the way back to the mission requirements so that you can say,

uh, this is why they use a particular communication system.

This is why they designed, uh, they used a specific orbit for the mission.

So that's the flavor I'm looking for. It's not a book report.

It's a reverse engineering. Why? The system ended up as built based on the mission requirements.

The second flavor of the your term paper is to come up with a mission that's interesting to you that may not be in existence.

Something that you might want to do around the Earth, around some other planet in our solar, you know,

solar system type mission, but come up with some kind of mission that would be interesting to you.

Apply the tools that we have developed during the term to a high level.

Discuss where you would put this mission, how you would get it there.

What type of payload it's going to carry, all the constraints necessary to accomplish that mission.

Dealing with power, uh, propulsion, thermal and structural analysis.

This would be at a high level. You certainly don't need to go down to the nuts and bolts,

but I would like to have a discussion of why you chose a particular communication frequency.

What kind of power level you think you might need in that communications system to get from wherever your mission is to the Earth.

How often you need to be in contact with the ground.

So that would drive how much on boards there?

Uh, data storage you would need things like that.

Just envelope type discussion. So that's the second flavor of the term paper.

As you see, the rest of the discussion here on this page simply says that I would like to know by shortly after

the midterm what the topic is that you think you would be interested in doing for one of two reasons.

One is, I want to make sure that there aren't so many people doing the same thing that, um, they are going to be, uh, essentially duplicating effort.

Another reason is that I want to make sure that I know there is enough information out there for you to be able to do a good job at your term paper.

And, uh, third reason is I want to make sure that there is not too much data available that would require you to down scope your project to,

for example, uh, looking at, um, observation satellite.

You may end up with a satellite that has, uh, um, great many different.

Observation sensors on board. If you tried to do a reverse engineering of all of them, you would end up with hundreds of pages of documentation.

So if there's too much information available or too many different sensors,

for example, I suggest that you down scope down to a few sensors or 1 or 2,

even so, that you can do a really good reverse engineering job without having to spend the rest of your life doing the project.

So that's the type of thing I'm looking for. Pardon the dogs as it shows on the rest of this slide.

Approximately 15 pages, more or less, with um, footnotes and charts and mathematics support added as appendices to your report,

and make sure that you do it in a format which is a professional in nature,

so that you would be pleased to submit this as part of a performance review to your supervisor,

or to your academic supervisor as a potential thesis project.

It doesn't have to be a thesis, but it has to be a professional type of presentation.

You can use whatever typical, uh, typical format you want, whether it's an AI, triple,

standard AI, or any other type of formatting standard that you are comfortable with.

That doesn't particularly bother me which format you use, and the project will be due after the final exam being turned in.

So I normally ask for the final exam to come in two weeks prior to the end of the term and the final term project one week prior to the semester end,

so that I have time to review all of those items before the end of the semester.

So there you are. That's a high level overview.

We will be discussing the term project in a much more detail later on in the semester.

As you see on this slide, you may certainly contact me at any time if you have questions on the homework or the material.

Anything that you need to clarify for this class, please contact me either at this email address or in fact,

if it's a little more urgent or you require some discussion back and forth rather than doing it by email,

please feel free to call me at the phone number you see here.

Additionally, I have in the past made use of Skype to converse with students from time to time, and sometimes that helps too.

So either way, please be sure that you contact me if there's anything that you need to have clarified in the way of questions or material.

That's what an instructor is for. So let's press on.

The first chapter in the textbook is at a very, very high level for this class,

but it does set the stage for much more detailed discussions that will be carrying on afterwards.

So if you look through it, you will see that there is a discussion on the so-called TRL levels.

If any of you are actually in the business of working for space mission companies, you will know that of course,

a particular space mission and the equipment that is used for that mission, some of it is very state of the art.

Some of it may also already have been space qualified.

All of this type of information goes into the discussion of the technical readiness level of a particular mission.

And so that's one of the things that is important. And understand that there is such a thing.

And as we go through our mission analysis, you will see how it all relates to the risk involved in carrying out the mission.

Also notice on the inside cover of the text is a website address and a password

to interactive tables that are associated with the material in this textbook.

If you see such a notation as shown here on this slide, then you can go to that website,

find the interactive table or calculation and use it for your information or for it perhaps for some homework assignments.

Now I must also add that some of the interactive items do not work correctly.

I have contacted the publisher and I have copies of the correct interactive uh, tables and figures, etc.

So as we go along, I will be of course looking at the assignments that you are going to be working with.

And if I know that there is an interactive table or figure that doesn't work out of the textbook linkage,

I will in fact include that on canvas or as part of the assignment for the homework.

But please do take a look at all these interactive tables, because they allow you two very different parameters in the design of,

for example, communications or thermal or of imaging types of systems.

And you can vary the parameters and see what happens if you are trying to accomplish a specific mission.

Vary the parameters and see how much propulsion you might need if you double the weight.

Uh, for example, of the payload. So these are very interesting things,

and certainly something that you can keep as reference material if you are in fact in the business of designing space missions.

This table shows a list of.

Not an exhaustive list, but at least a list of some of the most major astronautics and professional societies dealing with space missions.

If you have not joined or do not, are not a member of any of these, um, technical and professional societies, I would strongly encourage that.

If you intend to use space mission processes in the future or at the present time.

Some of them are quite interesting and have regional as well as global meetings, of which there are a number of papers presented.

Those papers are also available through downloads.

So a lot of these things have very good information.

I belong to quite a number myself, even though the cost is not cheap.

But nevertheless the papers and the material available through these professional societies

is quite good and does provide you with a really good background for your career.

Okay. Next week you're already behind. So next week you need to really catch up on your reading.

I know there's a lot of reading to be done in these first couple of chapters, first few chapters,

but it's all provides you with the background necessary to be able to carry on with the more technical details that we will be coming across very,

very soon. So catch up on your reading.

Don't let it go. Read through as much as you can on the details.

Look at the information that's available on the slides and in the textbook.

Don't forget that inside the front cover of your textbook is a website that leads

you to the ability to work with these interactive tables and figures in the text.

We will be using that capability as part of the toolbox that we will be developing during this first semester, first part of the semester.

